scripts/pcluster/README.md, before:

# Running the QA/QC script on an AWS pcluster with SLURM

Welcome! This guide walks you through running the QA/QC pipeline for historical weather station data using the AWS ParallelCluster environment. 🛰️🖥️

---

## 📖 Read This First!

- **Want to process different stations?**  
  See the [🔄 Changing the Stations to Run](#-changing-the-stations-to-run) section below.

- **PLEASE remember to turn off the compute fleet after your jobs finish!**  
  AWS charges while the fleet is running ⏳💸

---

## 🚀 Step-by-Step Instructions

1. **Start the compute fleet**  
   Use the AWS console to turn it on.

2. **SSH into the cluster:**  
   Use your unique cluster alias, which may or may not be the same as `hist-obs-cluster` depending on what you've set it to.  
   ```bash
   ssh hist-obs-cluster

3. **Navigate to the SLURM batch script directory:**  
   ```bash
   cd historical-obs-platform/test_platform/scripts/pcluster

4. **Make sure your AWS credentials are stored:**  
   You can either modify the batch script in these lines:   
   ```bash
   export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID="your-key-id"
   export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY="your-secret-key"
   export AWS_DEFAULT_REGION="us-west-2"
   ```
   OR you can save your credentials directly as environment variables (easier). However, it can be difficult to get these environment variables to persist across different sessions in the pcluster (i.e. if you log out and log back in, they might be wiped) and you will need to reset them each time. 

6. **Submit the batch script to SLURM:**  
   Once your batch script is updated with the correct AWS credentials and station information, submit it using the following command:
   ```bash
   sbatch run_qaqc_array.sh

7. **Monitor your run** 
 - Use squeue to check the job queue
 - Or tail the log files in the logs/ folder).

8. **Turn off the compute fleet**  
💡 Please don't forget! This helps us avoid surprise charges. 

---
## 🔄 Changing the Stations to Run
Each SLURM array task processes one station in a fully independent and serial job — a classic [embarrassingly parallel](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Embarrassingly_parallel) workload. The batch script (`run_qaqc_array.sh`) reads station info from `{NETWORK}-input.dat`, where {NETWORK} is the name of the weather station network (i.e. for network LOXWFO, the file is named `LOXWFO-input.dat`).

1. **Create a station list file**  
   Create a file named `{NETWORK}-input.dat` containing the stations you want to run. Each station should be on a new line—no commas, quotes, or extra formatting—and **all stations must belong to the same network**.

   👉 You can use the provided `generate_station_list.py` script to create this file. Check the script's header for usage instructions.

   Before creating a new file, check the `stations_input/` folder—some lists have already been pre-generated 😊.

   **Example file contents:**
   ```
   LOXWFO_CRXC1
   LOXWFO_ABC12
   ```

2. **Update the batch script**  
   The batch script needs two updates:
   - The array size (to match the number of stations)  
   - The path to the correct `{NETWORK}-input.dat` file

   You can do this in one of two ways:

   **Option 1 (Recommended): Use the generator script**
   ```bash
   python generate_batch_script -n="LOXWFO"
   ```
   This will automatically read from `LOXWFO-input.dat` and create a new batch script for you based on the template. The batch script will be called `qaqc_run_LOXWFO.sh`. 

   **Option 2: Manual edits**
   - Set the array size:
     ```bash
     #SBATCH --array=1-n
     ```
     Replace `n` with the number of stations (e.g., `1-2` if you have two stations).

   - Update the station file path:
     ```bash
     STATION=$(awk "NR==$SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID" stations_input/LOXWFO-input.dat)
     ```
  3. **Want to generate the `{NETWORK}-input.dat` and `qaqc_run_{NETWORK}.sh` for a bunch of files, all at once?**   
 - You can use this terminal command to run both python scripts for a number of stations, all at once:
     ```bash
      for net in ASOSAWOS CAHYDRO CIMIS CW3E CWOP CDEC CNRFC CRN HADS HNXWFO HOLFUY HPWREN LOXWFO MAP MTRWFO NCAWOS NOS-NWLON NOS-PORTS OtherISD RAWS SGXWFO SHASAVAL VCAPCD MARITIME NDBC SCAN SNOTEL; do python generate_station_list.py --network="$net"; done
     ```
     And then
   ```bash 
     for net in ASOSAWOS CAHYDRO CIMIS CW3E CWOP_1 CWOP_2 CWOP_3 CWOP_4 CWOP_5 CWOP_6 CWOP_7 CWOP_8 CDEC CNRFC CRN HADS_1 HADS_2 HADS_3 HNXWFO HOLFUY HPWREN LOXWFO MAP MTRWFO NCAWOS NOS-NWLON NOS-PORTS OtherISD RAWS_1 RAWS_2 RAWS_3 SGXWFO SHASAVAL VCAPCD MARITIME NDBC SCAN SNOTEL; do python generate_batch_script.py --network="$net"; done
  ```

     

### Additional Info
 - The station string must match the actual station ID in AWS.
 - No quotation marks around station ids in the `{NETWORK}-input.dat` (e.g., `LOXWFO_CRXC1`, not `"LOXWFO_CRXC1"`).
 - Each station id must be a new row in the `{NETWORK}-input.dat` file. 
 - Our pcluster has a setting where there can be no more than 1000 array jobs submitted, so the `generate_station_list.py` script generates more than one stations-input.dat file if the network has more than 1000 stations. For example, the HADS network has 2145 stations total. `generate_station_list.py` for the HADS network will actually make 3 different stations input files -- `HADS_1-input.dat`, `HADS_2-input.dat`, `HADS_3-input.dat`-- such that no list contains more than 1000 rows. You'll then need to run `generate_batch_script.py` for each `.dat` file: 
   
   ```bash 
   python generate_batch_script --network=HADS_1
   python generate_batch_script --network=HADS_2
   python generate_batch_script --network=HADS_3
   ```
---

## 📝 Reference Info

### Check job duration 
 - Look in the output file, usually in the same directory as the batch script.
 - Output file format:  
    ```
    ${SLURM_JOB_NAME}_${SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID}_${SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID}_${STATION}_output.txt
    ```
 - Error file format:  
    ```
    ${SLURM_JOB_NAME}_${SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID}_${SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID}_${STATION}_error.txt
    ```

### Monitor jobs 
 - Use `squeue` to see job status.

---

## 🌟 Tips & Reminders
✅ Double-check AWS credentials before submitting  
🔒 Don’t commit modified batch scripts with secrets to GitHub  
🔄 Keep your station list and SLURM array size in sync  
🧪 Use squeue and log files to debug if things go wrong  

---

Commit message:

Clarify batch script generation command in README
Updated the README to clarify the command for generating batch scripts and added instructions for the 'process' argument.

scripts/pcluster/README.md, after:

# Running the QA/QC script on an AWS pcluster with SLURM

Welcome! This guide walks you through running the QA/QC pipeline for historical weather station data using the AWS ParallelCluster environment. 🛰️🖥️

---

## 📖 Read This First!

- **Want to process different stations?**  
  See the [🔄 Changing the Stations to Run](#-changing-the-stations-to-run) section below.

- **PLEASE remember to turn off the compute fleet after your jobs finish!**  
  AWS charges while the fleet is running ⏳💸

---

## 🚀 Step-by-Step Instructions

1. **Start the compute fleet**  
   Use the AWS console to turn it on.

2. **SSH into the cluster:**  
   Use your unique cluster alias, which may or may not be the same as `hist-obs-cluster` depending on what you've set it to.  
   ```bash
   ssh hist-obs-cluster

3. **Navigate to the SLURM batch script directory:**  
   ```bash
   cd historical-obs-platform/test_platform/scripts/pcluster

4. **Make sure your AWS credentials are stored:**  
   You can either modify the batch script in these lines:   
   ```bash
   export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID="your-key-id"
   export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY="your-secret-key"
   export AWS_DEFAULT_REGION="us-west-2"
   ```
   OR you can save your credentials directly as environment variables (easier). However, it can be difficult to get these environment variables to persist across different sessions in the pcluster (i.e. if you log out and log back in, they might be wiped) and you will need to reset them each time. 

6. **Submit the batch script to SLURM:**  
   Once your batch script is updated with the correct AWS credentials and station information, submit it using the following command:
   ```bash
   sbatch run_qaqc_array.sh

7. **Monitor your run** 
 - Use squeue to check the job queue
 - Or tail the log files in the logs/ folder).

8. **Turn off the compute fleet**  
💡 Please don't forget! This helps us avoid surprise charges. 

---
## 🔄 Changing the Stations to Run
Each SLURM array task processes one station in a fully independent and serial job — a classic [embarrassingly parallel](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Embarrassingly_parallel) workload. The batch script (`run_qaqc_array.sh`) reads station info from `{NETWORK}-input.dat`, where {NETWORK} is the name of the weather station network (i.e. for network LOXWFO, the file is named `LOXWFO-input.dat`).

1. **Create a station list file**  
   Create a file named `{NETWORK}-input.dat` containing the stations you want to run. Each station should be on a new line—no commas, quotes, or extra formatting—and **all stations must belong to the same network**.

   👉 You can use the provided `generate_station_list.py` script to create this file. Check the script's header for usage instructions.

   Before creating a new file, check the `stations_input/` folder—some lists have already been pre-generated 😊.

   **Example file contents:**
   ```
   LOXWFO_CRXC1
   LOXWFO_ABC12
   ```

2. **Update the batch script**  
   The batch script needs two updates:
   - The array size (to match the number of stations)  
   - The path to the correct `{NETWORK}-input.dat` file

   You can do this in one of two ways:

   **Option 1 (Recommended): Use the generator script**
   ```bash
   python generate_batch_script -n="LOXWFO"
   ```
   This will automatically read from `LOXWFO-input.dat` and create a new batch script for you based on the template. The batch script will be called `qaqc_run_LOXWFO.sh`. 

   **Option 2: Manual edits**
   - Set the array size:
     ```bash
     #SBATCH --array=1-n
     ```
     Replace `n` with the number of stations (e.g., `1-2` if you have two stations).

   - Update the station file path:
     ```bash
     STATION=$(awk "NR==$SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID" stations_input/LOXWFO-input.dat)
     ```
  3. **Want to generate the `{NETWORK}-input.dat` and `qaqc_run_{NETWORK}.sh` for a bunch of files, all at once?**   
 - You can use this terminal command to run both python scripts for a number of stations, all at once:
     ```bash
      for net in ASOSAWOS CAHYDRO CIMIS CW3E CWOP CDEC CNRFC CRN HADS HNXWFO HOLFUY HPWREN LOXWFO MAP MTRWFO NCAWOS NOS-NWLON NOS-PORTS OtherISD RAWS SGXWFO SHASAVAL VCAPCD MARITIME NDBC SCAN SNOTEL; do python generate_station_list.py --network="$net"; done
     ```
     And then this commend, just update the "process" argument depending on if you want to generate the qaqc or merge scripts. 
     ```bash 
     for net in ASOSAWOS CAHYDRO CIMIS CW3E CWOP_1 CWOP_2 CWOP_3 CWOP_4 CWOP_5 CWOP_6 CWOP_7 CWOP_8 CDEC CNRFC CRN HADS_1 HADS_2 HADS_3 HNXWFO HOLFUY HPWREN LOXWFO MAP MTRWFO NCAWOS NOS-NWLON NOS-PORTS OtherISD RAWS_1 RAWS_2 RAWS_3 SGXWFO SHASAVAL VCAPCD MARITIME NDBC SCAN SNOTEL; do python generate_batch_script.py --network="$net" --process="qaqc"; done
  ```   

### Additional Info
 - The station string must match the actual station ID in AWS.
 - No quotation marks around station ids in the `{NETWORK}-input.dat` (e.g., `LOXWFO_CRXC1`, not `"LOXWFO_CRXC1"`).
 - Each station id must be a new row in the `{NETWORK}-input.dat` file. 
 - Our pcluster has a setting where there can be no more than 1000 array jobs submitted, so the `generate_station_list.py` script generates more than one stations-input.dat file if the network has more than 1000 stations. For example, the HADS network has 2145 stations total. `generate_station_list.py` for the HADS network will actually make 3 different stations input files -- `HADS_1-input.dat`, `HADS_2-input.dat`, `HADS_3-input.dat`-- such that no list contains more than 1000 rows. You'll then need to run `generate_batch_script.py` for each `.dat` file: 
   
   ```bash 
   python generate_batch_script --network=HADS_1
   python generate_batch_script --network=HADS_2
   python generate_batch_script --network=HADS_3
   ```
---

## 📝 Reference Info

### Check job duration 
 - Look in the output file, usually in the same directory as the batch script.
 - Output file format:  
    ```
    ${SLURM_JOB_NAME}_${SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID}_${SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID}_${STATION}_output.txt
    ```
 - Error file format:  
    ```
    ${SLURM_JOB_NAME}_${SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID}_${SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID}_${STATION}_error.txt
    ```

### Monitor jobs 
 - Use `squeue` to see job status.

---

## 🌟 Tips & Reminders
✅ Double-check AWS credentials before submitting  
🔒 Don’t commit modified batch scripts with secrets to GitHub  
🔄 Keep your station list and SLURM array size in sync  
🧪 Use squeue and log files to debug if things go wrong  

---
